# File: /content/odoo_doc17.0/fr/content/applications/finance/accounting/reporting/data_inalterability.md

Data inalterability check report
================================

Tax authorities in some countries require companies to **prove their
posted accounting entries are inalterable**, meaning that once an entry
has been posted, it can no longer be changed.

To do so, Odoo can use the **SHA-256 algorithm** to create a unique
fingerprint for each posted entry. This fingerprint is called a hash.
The hash is generated by taking an entry\'s essential data (the values
of the [name]{.title-ref}, [date]{.title-ref},
[journal\_id]{.title-ref}, [company\_id]{.title-ref},
[debit]{.title-ref}, [credit]{.title-ref}, [account\_id]{.title-ref},
and [partner\_id]{.title-ref} fields), concatenating it, and inputting
it to the SHA-256 hash function, which then outputs a fixed size
(256-bit) string of characters. The hash function is deterministic (`the
same input always creates the same output`{.interpreted-text
role="dfn"}): any minor modification to the original data would
completely change the resulting hash. Consequently, the SHA-256
algorithm is often used, among others, for data integrity verification
purposes.

In addition, the previous entry\'s hash is always added to the next
entry to form a **hash chain**. This is used to ensure a new entry is
not added afterward between two posted entries, as doing so would break
the hash chain.

::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

Hashes generated by the SHA-256 algorithm are theoretically not unique,
as there is a finite number of possible values. However, this number is
exceptionally high: 2²⁵⁶, which is a lot bigger than the number of atoms
in the known universe. This is why hashes are considered unique in
practice.
:::

Lock posted entries with hash {#data-inalterability/lock}
-----------------------------

To start using the hashing function, go to
`Accounting --> Configuration > Journals`{.interpreted-text
role="menuselection"}. Open the journal for which you want to activate
the feature, go to the `Advanced Settings`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} tab, and enable
`Lock Posted Entries with Hash`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.

::: {.warning}
::: {.title}
Warning
:::

Once you post an entry on a locked journal, you cannot disable the
feature anymore, nor edit any posted entry.
:::

Report download {#data-inalterability/report}
---------------

To download the data inalterability check report, go to
`Accounting --> Configuration
--> Settings --> Reporting`{.interpreted-text role="menuselection"} and
click on
`Download the Data Inalterability Check Report`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"}.

The report\'s first section is an overview of all your journals and
their configuration. Under the inalterability check column, you can see
whether or not a journal\'s posted entries are locked with a hash (V) or
not (X). The coverage column tells you when a journal\'s posted entries
started being locked.

{.align-center}

The second section gives you the result of the data consistency check
for each hashed journal. You can view the first hashed entry and its
corresponding hash and the last hashed entry and its corresponding hash.

{.align-center}
