# File: /content/odoo_doc17.0/fr/content/applications/inventory_and_mrp/inventory/warehouses_storage/replenishment.md

show-content

:   

hide-page-toc

:   

Replenishment
=============

In Odoo, stock can be replenished one of three ways: *reordering rules*,
the *make to order* (MTO) route, or using the *master production
schedule* (MPS).

Each replenishment mechanism triggers the creation or suggestion of a
purchase order (PO) or manufacturing order (MO), with the best choice
depending on the business process.

::: {.cards}
::: {.card target="replenishment/reordering_rules" tag="Recommended" large=""}
Reordering rules

Automatically suggest or generate POs or MOs when stock falls below a
minimum level.
:::

::: {.card target="replenishment/mto" tag="Beginner-friendly"}
MTO

Automatically generate POs or MOs when sales orders are confirmed.
:::

::: {.card target="../../manufacturing/workflows/use_mps"}
MPS

Manage long-term replenishment based on inputted sales forecasts, via a
dashboard.
:::
:::

Replenishment strategies
------------------------

### Replenishment report and reordering rules

Reordering rules are rules that can be set up to maintain a minimum
stock level. They are often configured to support manufacturing or sales
requirements. When a product\'s stock falls at or below the minimum
level, Odoo generates (or suggests) a purchase or manufacturing order to
replenish stock to the maximum level.

When using automatic reordering rules, Odoo generates a new order. When
using manual, Odoo suggests orders on the replenishment report. For
detailed guidance, refer to the `replenishment report
<replenishment/report>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"} and
`reordering rules <replenishment/reordering_rules>`{.interpreted-text
role="doc"}.

Key points include:

-   `Automatic reordering rules <inventory/warehouses_storage/auto-rr>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"}: Automatically create
    `POs (Purchase Orders)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} or
    `MOs (Manufacturing Orders)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} when
    stock falls below the minimum level. While this is convenient, it is
    less flexible.
-   `Manual reordering rules <inventory/warehouses_storage/manual-rr>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"}: Generate suggestions in the replenishment report for
    user review, allowing adjustments and batch orders while meeting
    deadlines.
-   `Just-in-time logic <inventory/warehouses_storage/just-in-time>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"}: A strategy to replenish only what is needed to prevent
    overstocking.

::: {.seealso}
\- `replenishment/reordering_rules`{.interpreted-text role="doc"} -
`replenishment/report`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
:::

### Make to order {#inventory/management/products/strategies}

An `MTO (Make to Oder)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} strategy means
that procurement or production is triggered only after a sales order has
been confirmed. This strategy is recommended when products are
customizable, demand is unpredictable, there is limited storage
capacity, and when products are high in value and low in demand. In such
cases, it does not make sense to keep on-hand inventory.

Unlike products replenished using reordering rules, Odoo automatically
links the sales order to the `PO (Purchase Order)`{.interpreted-text
role="abbr"} or `MO (Manufacturing Order)`{.interpreted-text
role="abbr"} generated by the `MTO (Make to Oder)`{.interpreted-text
role="abbr"} route.

Another difference between reordering rules and
`MTO (Make to Oder)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} is, with
`MTO (Make to Oder)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"}, Odoo generates a
draft `PO (Purchase Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} or
`MO (Manufacturing Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} immediately
after the `SO (Sales Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} is
confirmed. With reordering rules, Odoo generates a draft
`PO (Purchase Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} or
`MO (Manufacturing Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} when the
product\'s forecasted stock falls below the set minimum quantity.

In addition, Odoo automatically adds quantities to the
`PO (Purchase Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} or
`MO (Manufacturing Order)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} as the
forecast changes, so long as the `PO (Purchase Order)`{.interpreted-text
role="abbr"} or `MO (Manufacturing Order)`{.interpreted-text
role="abbr"} is not confirmed.

The `MTO (Make to Oder)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} route is the
best replenishment strategy for products that are customized, and/or for
products that have no stock kept on-hand.

::: {.seealso}
`replenishment/mto`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
:::

### Master production schedule

The `MPS (Master Production Schedule)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} is
a dashboard where products and their forecasted quantities are entered.
Based on confirmed manufacturing and purchase orders, the dashboard
recommends amounts to order or produce.

This a useful **manual** tool for keeping track of quantities. The
`MPS (Master Production
Schedule)`{.interpreted-text role="abbr"} **should absolutely not** be
used alongside reordering rules, as the automated workflow disrupts its
manual replenishment method.

::: {.seealso}
`../../manufacturing/workflows/use_mps`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
:::

::: {.toctree titlesonly=""}
replenishment/mto replenishment/reordering\_rules replenishment/report
replenishment/lead\_times replenishment/resupply\_warehouses
:::
