# File: /content/odoo_doc17.0/fr/content/applications/productivity/sign.md

Sign
====

**Odoo Sign** allows you to send, sign, and approve documents online,
using electronic signatures.

An **electronic signature** shows a person\'s agreement to the content
of a document. Just like a handwritten signature, the electronic one
represents a legal bounding by the terms of the signed document.

With Sign, you can upload any PDF file and add fields to it. These
fields can be automatically filled in with the user\'s details present
in your database.

::: {.seealso}
\-  - [Odoo
Tutorials: Sign \
:::

Validity of electronic signatures
---------------------------------

Documents signed via the Sign app are valid electronic signatures in the
European Union and the United States of America. They also meet the
requirements for electronic signatures in most countries. The legal
validity of electronic signatures generated by Odoo depends on your
country\'s legislation. Companies doing business abroad should also
consider other countries\' electronic signature laws.

::: {.important}
::: {.title}
Important
:::

The below information has no legal value; it is only provided for
general informational purposes. As laws governing electronic signatures
rapidly evolve, we cannot guarantee that all information is up-to-date.
We advise contacting a local attorney for legal advice regarding
electronic signature compliance and validity.
:::

### European Union

The 
establishes the framework for electronic signatures in the [27 member
states of the European
Union](https://europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/countries_en). It
distinguishes three types of electronic signatures:

1.  Simple electronic signatures
2.  Advanced electronic signatures
3.  Qualified electronic signatures

Odoo generates the first type, **simple electronic signatures**; these
signatures are legally valid in the EU, as stated in the eIDAS
regulation.

Electronic signatures may not be automatically recognized as valid. You
may need to bring supporting evidence of a signature\'s validity. While
the Sign app provides a simple electronic signature, some supporting
evidence is automatically collected during the signature process, such
as:

1.  Email and SMS validation (if enabled)
2.  Strong identity proof through itsme® (available in Belgium and the
    Netherlands)
3.  Timestamped, IP and geographically traceable access logs to the
    documents and their associated signatures
4.  Document traceability and inalterability (any alteration made to a
    signed document is detected by Odoo with the use of cryptographic
    proofs)

::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

`Documentation for Germany <sign/germany>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
:::

### United States of America

The [ESIGN Act (Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce
Act)](https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/compliance/manual/10/X-3.1.pdf),
at the interstate and international levels, and the [UETA (Uniform
Electronic Transactions
Act)](https://www.uniformlaws.org/committees/community-home/librarydocuments?communitykey=2c04b76c-2b7d-4399-977e-d5876ba7e034&tab=librarydocuments),
at the state level, provide the legal framework for electronic
signatures. Note that

and [New
York](https://its.ny.gov/electronic-signatures-and-records-act-esra)
have not adopted the UETA, but similar acts instead.

Overall, to be recognized as valid, electronic signatures have to meet
five criteria:

1.  The signer must show a clear **intent to sign**. For example, using
    a mouse to draw a signature can show intent. The signer must also
    have the option to opt out of the electronic document.
2.  The signer must first express or imply their **consent to conduct
    business electronically**.
3.  **The signature must be clearly attributed**. In Odoo, metadata,
    such as the signer\'s IP address, is added to the signature, which
    can be used as supporting evidence.
4.  **The signature must be associated with the signed document**, for
    example, by keeping a record detailing how the signature was
    captured.
5.  Electronically signed documents need to be **retained and stored**
    by all parties involved; for example, by providing the signer either
    a fully-executed copy or the possibility to download a copy.

### Other countries

-   `Algeria <sign/algeria>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Angola <sign/angola>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Argentina <sign/argentina>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Australia <sign/australia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Azerbaijan <sign/azerbaijan>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Bangladesh <sign/bangladesh>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Brazil <sign/brazil>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Canada <sign/canada>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Chile <sign/chile>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `China <sign/china>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Colombia <sign/colombia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Dominican Republic <sign/dominican_republic>`{.interpreted-text
    role="doc"}
-   `Ecuador <sign/ecuador>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Egypt <sign/egypt>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Ethiopia <sign/ethiopia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Guatemala <sign/guatemala>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Hong Kong <sign/hong_kong>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `India <sign/india>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Indonesia <sign/indonesia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Iran <sign/iran>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Iraq <sign/iraq>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Israel <sign/israel>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Japan <sign/japan>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Kazakhstan <sign/kazakhstan>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Kenya <sign/kenya>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Kuwait <sign/kuwait>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Malaysia <sign/malaysia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Mexico <sign/mexico>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Morocco <sign/morocco>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `New Zealand <sign/new_zealand>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Nigeria <sign/nigeria>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Norway <sign/norway>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Oman <sign/oman>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Pakistan <sign/pakistan>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Peru <sign/peru>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Philippines <sign/philippines>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Qatar <sign/qatar>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Russia <sign/russia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Saudi Arabia <sign/saudi_arabia>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Singapore <sign/singapore>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `South Africa <sign/south_africa>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `South Korea <sign/south_korea>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Switzerland <sign/switzerland>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Thailand <sign/thailand>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Turkey <sign/turkey>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Ukraine <sign/ukraine>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `United Arab Emirates <sign/united_arab_emirates>`{.interpreted-text
    role="doc"}
-   `United Kingdom <sign/united_kingdom>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Uzbekistan <sign/uzbekistan>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
-   `Vietnam <sign/vietnam>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}

Send a document to sign
-----------------------

### One-time signature

You can click `Upload a PDF to sign`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}
from your dashboard for a one-time signature. Select your document, open
it, and drag and drop the required
`fields <sign/fields>`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} in your document.
You can modify the `role <sign/role>`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}
assigned to a field by clicking on it and selecting the one you want.

When ready, click `Send`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}, and fill in
the required fields. Once sent, your document remains available. Go to
`Documents --> All Documents`{.interpreted-text role="menuselection"} to
see your document and the status of the signatures.



#### Validity dates and reminders

You can set **validity dates** on limited-duration agreement documents
or send **automatic email reminders** to obtain signatures on time. From
your dashboard, click `Send`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} on your
document. On the new page, go to the `Options`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} section and fill in the `Valid
Until`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} and
`Reminder`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} fields.

### Templates

You can create document templates when you have to send the same
document several times. From your dashboard, click
`Upload a PDF template`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Select the
document and add the required `fields <sign/fields>`{.interpreted-text
role="ref"}. You can modify the `role <sign/role>`{.interpreted-text
role="ref"} of a field by clicking on it and selecting the one you want.

Click `Template Properties`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} to add
`Tags`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} to your template, define a
`Signed Document Workspace`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}, add
`Signed Document Tags`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}, set a
`Redirect Link`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} that will be
available in the signature confirmation message received after the
signature, or define `Authorized Users`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} if you want to restrict the use of your template to
specific authorized users or groups.

Your templates are visible by default on your dashboard. You can click
`Send`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} to quickly send a document
template to a signer or `Sign Now`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} if
you are ready to sign your document immediately.

::: {.tip}
::: {.title}
Tip
:::

You can **create a template from a document that was previously sent**.
To do so, go to `Documents --> All Documents`{.interpreted-text
role="menuselection"}. On the document you want to retrieve, click on
the the vertical ellipsis (`⋮`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}), then
`Template`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Click on the vertical
ellipsis (`⋮`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}) again, then
`Restore`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Your document now appears
on your dashboard next to your other templates.
:::

Roles {#sign/role}
-----

Each field in a Sign document is related to a role corresponding to a
specific person. When a document is being signed, the person assigned to
the role must fill in their assigned fields and sign it.

Roles are available by going to
`Sign --> Configuration --> Roles`{.interpreted-text
role="menuselection"}.

It is possible to update existing roles or to create new roles by
clicking on `New`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Choose a
`Role Name`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}, add an
`Extra Authentication Step`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} to
confirm the identity of the signing person, and if the document can be
reassigned to another contact, select
`Change Authorized`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} for the role. A
`Color`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} can also be chosen for the
role. This color can help understand which roles are responsible for
which field when configuring a template.

### Secured identification

As the owner of a document, you may request an
`Extra Authentication Step`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} through
`SMS verification <sign/sms>`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} or via
`Itsme® <sign/itsme>`{.interpreted-text role="ref"} (available in
Belgium and the Netherlands). Both authentication options require
`credits <iap/buying_credits>`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}. If you do
not have any credits left, the authentication steps will be skipped.

::: {.seealso}
\-
`In-App Purchase (IAP) <../essentials/in_app_purchase>`{.interpreted-text
role="doc"} -
`SMS pricing and FAQ <../marketing/sms_marketing/pricing_and_faq>`{.interpreted-text
role="doc"}
:::

#### SMS verification {#sign/sms}

Go to `Sign --> Configuration --> Roles`{.interpreted-text
role="menuselection"}. Click in the `Extra
Authentication Step`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} column for the
role, and select `Unique Code Via SMS`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"}.

::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

Before being able to send SMS Text Messages, you need to register your
phone number. To do so, go to
`Sign --> Configuration --> Settings`{.interpreted-text
role="menuselection"} and click `Buy credits`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} under `Authenticate by SMS`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"}.
:::

Go to the document to sign, add the field for which the SMS verification
is required, for example, the `Signature`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} field, and click `Send`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"}. On the new page, select the
`customer`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} and click
`Send`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.

The person signing the document fills in the
`Signature`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} field, then
`Sign`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}, and clicks
`Validate & Send Completed Document`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.
A `Final Validation`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} page pops up
where to add their phone number. One-time codes are sent by SMS.



::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

\- This feature is enabled by default. - As soon as the
`Extra Authentication Step`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} applies
to a role, this validation step is requested for any field assigned to
this role.
:::

#### Itsme® {#sign/itsme}

Itsme® authentication can be used to allow signatories to provide their
identity using itsme®. This feature is only available in **Belgium** and
the **Netherlands**.

The feature can be enabled in `Sign Settings`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} and applies automatically to the
`Customer (identified with itsme®)`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}
role. To enable it for other roles, go to
`Sign --> Configuration --> Roles`{.interpreted-text
role="menuselection"}. Click in the `Extra Authentication
Step`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} column for the role, and select
`Via itsme®`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.

Go to the document that needs to be signed and add the
`Signature`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} field. Switch to any role
configured to use the feature, and click `Validate`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} and `Send`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.



Upon signing the document, the signer completes the
`Signature`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} field and proceeds by
clicking on `Validate & Send Completed Document`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"}, triggering a `Final verification`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} page where authentication via itsme® is required.

Signatory hash
--------------

Each time someone signs a document, a **hash** - a unique digital
signature of the operation - is generated to ensure traceability,
integrity, and inalterability. This process guarantees that any changes
made after a signature is affixed can be easily detected, maintaining
the document\'s authenticity and security throughout its lifecycle.

A visual security frame displaying the beginning of the hash is added to
the signatures. Internal users can hide or show it by turning the
`Frame`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} option on or off when signing
the document.



Tags {#sign/field-types}
----

Tags can be used to categorize and organize documents, allowing users to
quickly search for and filter documents based on specific criteria.

You can manage tags by going to
`Configuration --> Tags`{.interpreted-text role="menuselection"}. To
create a tag, click `New`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. On the new
line, add the `Tag Name`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} and select a
`Color Index`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} for your tag.

To apply a tag to a document, use the dropdown list available in your
document.

::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

You can modify the tags of a signed document by going to
`Documents --> All
Documents`{.interpreted-text role="menuselection"}, clicking the
vertical ellipsis (`⋮`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}) on your
document, then `Details`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}, and
modifying your `Tags`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.
:::

Sign order
----------

When a document needs to be signed by different parties, the signing
order lets you control the order in which your recipients receive it for
signature.

After uploading a PDF with at least two signature fields with two
different roles and clicking `Send`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"},
toggle the `Specify Signing Order`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}
switch and search for the signer\'s name or email information to add
them. You can decide on the signing order by typing **1** or **2** in
the first column.



Each recipient receives the signature request notification only once the
previous recipient has completed their action.

Field types {#sign/fields}
-----------

Fields are used in a document to indicate what information must be
completed by the signers. You can add fields to your document simply by
dragging and dropping them for the left column into your document.

Various field types can be used to sign documents (placeholder,
autocompletion, etc.). By configuring your own field types, also known
as signature item types, the signing process can be even faster for your
customers, partners, and employees.

To create and edit field types, go to
`Sign --> Configuration --> Settings -->
Edit field types`{.interpreted-text role="menuselection"}.

You can select an existing field by clicking on it, or you can
`Create`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} a new one. First, edit the
`Field Name`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Then, select a
`Field Type`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}:

-   `Signature`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: users are asked to
    enter their signature either by drawing it, generating an automatic
    one based on their name, or uploading a local file (usually an
    image). Each subsequent `Signature`{.interpreted-text
    role="guilabel"} field type then reuses the data entered in the
    first field.
-   `Initial`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: users are asked to
    enter their initials, in a similar way to the
    `Signature`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} field.
-   `Text`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: users enter text on a
    single line.
-   `Multiline Text`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: users enter
    text on multiple lines.
-   `Checkbox`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: users can tick a box
    (e.g., to mark their approval or consent).
-   `Selection`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: users choose a
    single option from a variety of options.

The `Auto-fill Partner Field`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} setting
is used to automatically fill in a field during the signature process.
It uses the value of one of the fields on the contact
([res.partner]{.title-ref}) model of the person signing the document. To
do so, enter the contact model field\'s technical name.

::: {.tip}
::: {.title}
Tip
:::

To know the technical name of a field, enable developer mode and hover
your mouse on the question mark next to the field.
:::

::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

Auto-completed values are suggestions and can be modified as required by
the person signing the document.
:::

The size of the fields can also be changed by editing the
`Default Width`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} and
`Default Height`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Both sizes are
defined as a percentage of the full page expressed as a decimal, with 1
equalling the full page\'s width or height. By default, the width of new
fields you create is set to 15% (0.150) of a full page\'s width, while
their height is set to 1.5% (0.015) of a full page\'s height.

Next, write a `Tip`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}. Tips are
displayed inside arrows on the left-hand side of the user\'s screen
during the signing process to help them understand what the step entails
(e.g., \"Sign here\" or "Fill in your birthdate"). You can also use a
`Placeholder`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} text to be displayed
inside the field before it is completed.


