# File: /content/odoo_doc17.0/fr/content/applications/finance/payment_providers/wire_transfer.md

Wire transfers
==============

The **Wire Transfer** payment method allows you to provide payment
instructions to your customers, such as your bank details and a
reference to include with the payment. These instructions are displayed
after the customer selects `Wire Transfer`{.interpreted-text
role="guilabel"} as the payment method and clicks the
`Pay now`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} button at the end of the
checkout process on your ecommerce website or on the customer portal.



::: {.note}
::: {.title}
Note
:::

\- While this method is widely accessible and requires minimal setup, it
is not efficient process-wise. It is recommended to set up a
`payment provider <../payment_providers>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
instead. - Online orders remain in the
`Quotation sent`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} (i.e., unpaid order)
stage until you receive the payment and manually
`Confirm`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} the order.
:::

::: {.tip}
::: {.title}
Tip
:::

**Wire transfer** can be used as a template for other payment methods
that are processed manually, such as checks, by renaming or duplicating
it.
:::

Configuration
-------------

To configure **Wire Transfer**:

1.  `Navigate to the Wire Transfer payment provider <payment_providers/supported_providers>`{.interpreted-text
    role="ref"}.

2.  In the `Configuration`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} tab,
    select whether the memo or `Communication`{.interpreted-text
    role="guilabel"} to be displayed alongside the payment instructions
    should be:

    -   `Based on Document Reference`{.interpreted-text
        role="guilabel"}: the sales order or invoice number
    -   `Based on Customer ID`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}: the
        customer identifier

3.  Enable `Enable QR codes`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} to
    activate QR code payments.

    ::: {.note}
    ::: {.title}
    Note
    :::

    `Additional accounting setup <../accounting/customer_invoices/epc_qr_code>`{.interpreted-text
    role="doc"} is required to use QR codes.
    :::

4.  Define the payment instructions in the `Messages`{.interpreted-text
    role="guilabel"} tab. If `a bank account
    <../accounting/bank>`{.interpreted-text role="doc"} has already been
    defined, the account number is automatically added to the default
    message generated by Odoo. You can also add it afterward and update
    the message by clicking `Reload pending message`{.interpreted-text
    role="guilabel"}.

    

5.  Set the `State`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"} field to
    `Enabled`{.interpreted-text role="guilabel"}.

::: {.tip}
::: {.title}
Tip
:::

You can also test wire transfers using the
`payment_providers/test-mode`{.interpreted-text role="ref"}.
:::

::: {.seealso}
`../payment_providers`{.interpreted-text role="doc"}
:::
